Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And Bill Vernon.
Gordon R. Dixon is one of the old-time professionals in science fiction.
He's been writing this stuff full-time for over 30 years.
The size and uncountable number of short stories, he's published such novels as Dorsi, The
Pritcher Mass, The Dragon in the George, and The Star Sailors.
He's also won Hugo and Nibbula awards for his science fiction, and he served as president
of the Science Fiction Writers of America.
We asked Dixon if he'd always been a full-time writer.
Yeah.
I went effectively out of... I just started at the beginning.
I didn't really know anything about a writer, actually.
I entered the University of Minnesota in 1939 when I was 15 years old, and began to work
toward a degree with a major in creative writing.
And World War II came along before I was able to get my BA.
So I was out for three or four years.
I forget which, something like that.
And I went back and spent another two years.
I went into graduate school.
At the time, it's about the only time in my life when I ever considered doing anything
but writing.
I was playing with the idea then of holding down a teaching job, going on and getting
my doctorate in English and teaching, and doing the writing on the side.
After World War II, we were all hypersensitive.
Everybody was very cool-headed.
Let's have his nonsense over with.
Get down and get the work someplace.
And luckily, I came out of that, and said, this is silly.
I'd never intended to do anything but writing.
Instead of having a teaching paper for the writing, why not make the writing paper for the writing?
So I simply dived out of graduate school into full-time writing for the magazines.
Dixon published his first story in the Science Fiction Magazine around 1950.
And by writing for the Pulps, he was able to support himself.
So actually, I dived in and kept myself in full-time writing for the magazines for about
three or four years, and then somewhere about 1954, I did my first Science Fiction novel.
So I didn't full-time have the writer since 1950.
Now, I told things before that.
I told a magazine piece, I think, as early as 1942, and I had something in my magazine
that was a short-short story in a magazine text from a Minneapolis paper, and I'd been in the Toronto Star Weekly,
which was a magazine supplement that went along with the Toronto Star Journal.
Star Journal?
Can't remember the name of the newspaper.
Dixon reveals more about his background and his literary preferences.
You see, the thing is that I always intended to be a writer.
And about the first 30 years of my life, I was simply looking for the type of thing I wanted to write.
I kept my faith on poetry.
If I'd been born in the late 19th century, I would have been at home, because I would have done long-nourished
at points like Idle with the King, you know, Tennyson, and I was on things like that.
As it is within an unported age, and I finally ended up saying,
well, to do what I want to do, I'm going to have to use the medium of just those alone.
And then simply because magazines were putting butter on the table, and I found out I liked science fiction best,
I liked writing science fiction best, I ended up doing faithfully nothing but science fiction.
And as I did this, I came to realize the possibilities of that particular field for what I wanted to do.
What Dixon wanted to do was an ambitious undertaking to publish a series of 12 novels dealing with man's ethical evolution.
He's still working on the series, called The Child Cycle.
Some of the novels ended on Necromancer, Dorsi, and The Tactics of Mistake.
We'll talk more with Gordon Dixon next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lange.
Gordon Dixon has written highly popular science fiction for over three decades,
but during that time he's been most concerned with one major vision, a series of novels called The Child Cycle.
The series will be at least 12 novels long.
The books will be set in the past, the present, and the future, and they will deal with what Dixon calls the ethical evolution of man.
Some of the novels have already been written, Dorsi being perhaps the best known of them.
Dixon says that when he began writing science fiction, he realized the possibilities that the field offered him to pursue his vision.
And of course what I wanted to do is now take in shape, long since 20 years ago, as The Child Cycle of novels,
which is, when it's done, will cover a thousand years.
There'll be three historical novels starting with one about Sir John Hawthorne, who was an Englishman in the 13th century,
who ended up as Captain General of the Military Forces for Florence, Italy,
and will end in the 23rd century with The Child, the novel from which the whole series takes its name.
And the whole series effectively, the stories don't chronologically follow each other.
They're connected thematically, and what they represent is sort of a literary thematic argument, something that has never been done before actually,
which argues, the philosophical point in fact, that we're undergoing evolution right now.
It's not physical evolution or mental evolution.
There's no really good word for it.
You would call it spiritual evolution, but that isn't right.
Either it's nathical evolution.
We're of necessity.
We're evolving what I call a responsible human being.
We're sort of halfway there from the time of the 13th, from the viewpoint of the 13th century, toward the 23rd.
We're halfway to developing the responsible human being.
Dixon explains what he means by the responsible human being.
If you assume that old insanity is going to be brought under control unless civilization goes crash within the next 50 or 100 years,
not a lot sooner, that is going to give you a population of sane people,
but even a population of sane people can have individuals who for their own purposes are willing to destroy things.
Now, back in the days of the Flint acts and the Stone Club,
a particular cheap man decided to run wild and start bobbing people over the head.
He could probably kill two or three others before everybody ganged up on him and stopped him.
That's escalated up to our time where somebody who knows how can set up a laboratory in the basement and blow up a large sized city or part of a state.
You extrapolate the sort of destructive possibility.
You see that within, well, probably less than the 300 to 500 years I give us,
you're going to have a situation where any individual can destroy the whole race,
unless some such sense of responsibility is developed.
And what the historical novels do and the contemporary novels do is what a good hard science fiction story does,
and that is they lay out the evidence of what we know and then extrapolate forward from there saying,
all right, if this and this and this is so and we know it to be so, then doesn't this develop from it?
And if I'm wrong, it might have others as point out for that wrong.
And so the whole cycle becomes essentially sort of one large science fiction story,
even though it covers historical contemporary and your novels.
More with Gordon Dixon next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Thank you.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and Bill Vernon.
Dorsi, the first book in Gordon Dixon's projected 12 novel series called The Child Cycle, was published in 1959.
Dorsi concerns a world of humans who are the ultimate warriors, much like the Spartans of ancient Greece,
they train from childhood to be formidable fighters and battle strategists.
Since Dorsi is one of Dixon's most popular works, he's gotten the reputation of being a militarist,
a writer concerned mainly with war.
Who asked Dixon if he thought this estimate was a fair one?
Dixon, the person of people we can look up in history books, the 20th century will show them at work in our century.
The future ones show them in the projected and problematical future, but the warrior is only one of three types,
all of which equally necessary.
Now the reason the emphasis on the military is there is for two reasons.
One is this copy, the Eye of the Publishers, and they package the books as military-oriented books.
And in fact the ones that dealt with warrior types like Donald Reign and the First One, Dorsi, where Donald Reign is a warrior type,
were in little duty to it that way, but then they began publishing whole things in this way.
That is part of it. The other part of it is that all the cycle must be sound, must be watertight.
Is that the military elements in there are justified, are logicalized.
So it's not, I don't blame people for being let astray in this particular fashion,
but if they will look closely at the cycle, they will see it is true.
And about the only people I have any quarrel with are those who, without reading the things, simply make the assumption
that this is a military-oriented series of books.
When Dixon published Dorsi in 1959, he hadn't yet thought of the idea of a large cycle in which that novel would only be a part.
He says the idea of the cycle came to him when he went to the Milford Science Fiction Conference in Pennsylvania in 1960.
Getting breath in, it's a matter of getting breath out. You swell up with air that you can't exhale.
And your adrenaline level goes off the top of the map. You're physically in capacity,
but your mind is galloping. Now we lay off of it with defectively, and there was nothing to be done until dawn
at which time other people would be up and they could drive me to the doctor or clinic or whatever.
And so I just had nothing to do but sit there for five hours and wait for the sun to rise.
And in that time I worked out the patterns of this cycle completely, from soup canots with every book in its place
or rather every... I shouldn't say every book because the numbers of books have doubled because of the size of what's being done,
but it's a case of the original books more or less being split down the middle, the same, because they're too big to publish as it's shown.
We'll continue talking with Gordon Dixon on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
And so we're going to be talking about the science fiction, which is a very interesting story.
Music
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon.
And Daryl Lane.
Science fiction author Gordon Dixon has been working on his ambitious child cycle for over 20 years.
When completed, the cycle will encompass at least 12 novels and will describe the ethical evolution of man.
Dorsi, the first novel written in the series, though not the first chronologically,
was published in a serial in Astounding magazine in 1959.
We asked Dixon if his overall plan is still based on a 12 novel series.
Yes, the original plan was for six novels.
No, for nine novels.
Pardon me.
Three historical, three late in the 20th century, and three late in the future.
Because I started on the future length first, it was there I first discovered that each book was going to be too big to get into one set of covers.
Also, to begin with, with Dorsi and Soldier Astronaut and Necromancer and things like that,
I was up against the fact that publishers refused to print category fiction in lengths of much more than 100,000 words at that time.
Remember this, the first big book to come out actually was Frank Herbert's Dune, which andedates Dorsi, which happened earlier,
about, I think, four or six years, something like that.
And Dune was printed only because one editor in particular practically, well,
made his job online and practically offered to shoot up the publishing house of Leslie, what after it.
And they chewed their fingernails, you know, because there's a great deal of money involved in printing a very large book.
This is still the case, even with paperbacks, even with paperback, it's very expensive to do a big take book.
So these things had to be cut, pardon me, I mean, they had to be divided into smaller chunks.
And the result was I ended up with three historical, three contemporary, and six forward.
Now, of that six forward, Final Encyclopedia, at 1400 pages, is so big that Child, which could have been, see, that Final Encyclopedia is an element novel.
The last one, the ultimate one, is Child. And obviously, if Final Encyclopedia is 1400, Child would have run close to 2000 manuscript pages,
which is far too big, so I'm had to split that again. So effectively, what we have now is not 12, but 13 novels.
What about the works that are set in the past, the historical novels? Will Dixon stick to his original plan for a set of three?
I think there's a pretty good chance, except in the case of Hawkwood. Now, and the problem with that is that Sir John Hawkwood, the actual man, lived a very long time by medieval standards.
And astonishingly long time when you just stopped to think that most of his adult life was spent in hand-to-hand combat, wearing armor.
He actually lived into his 70s, and he covered in that time, what by modern standards would have been three or four lifetimes.
He starts out in Cipollet-Headigan, England, which is out in the Moon Docks of Essex in his time, literally when Essex was mainly forest.
And he ended up in Florence, Italy, which at that time was the center of western civilization.
So effectively he traveled in subjective time, about 150 to 180 years, in terms of moving forward with the pattern of civilization.
More with Gordon Dixon next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Thanks for watching.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and Bill Vernon.
Gordon Dixon has been turning out popular science fiction for over three decades.
During that time he's published around 40 novels and over 150 short stories.
And he's presently at work on his massive series The Child Cycle, which will be around 13 novels when completed.
We ask Dixon if he gets tired of writing, and if it's hard for him to write.
Any art requires an instant amount of work.
And he wasn't said that the definition of art was the taking of intimate things or words about a fact.
But the point is, the person being that enjoys it or he doesn't do it, I'm fascinated with the work I do.
You wonder for example how a concert pianist can practice five hours a day, week after week, month after month, year after year.
You think if you're a non-pianoplayer or if you had piano playing lessons pushed on you and didn't like them when you were young, you think.
But this must be a self-imposed agony. It is. It's a sheer pleasure for him to get things just right.
And this of course is the battle cry of the artist, to get things just right.
When we asked Dixon if he has to do a lot of rewriting, he alluded to a book he had just finished and that should be published soon, The Final Encyclopedia.
I write and rewrite and rewrite and rewrite again.
This last book, sections of it were written once and barely touched again.
Other sections were written in numbable time. I really couldn't tell you how many. Ten or more. Ten, fifteen times. To get it just right.
I can't reread anything I've written without picking up a pencil and starting to collect and improve it. It's instinctive.
Most writers have this kind of reaction. Although some rewrite, more some rewrite.
There is a type of writer that doesn't rewrite and instead sits and does nothing for a long time and sits down and does it just the way he or she wants it.
And that possibly is the hardest work of all because it's all being done in him. I do it on paper.
Of course, the fact that I use a computer to write with Valdez makes it that much easier. Makes it that much faster.
Dixon says that science fiction has developed over the years. A natural progression from the hardware stories of the late 20s and early 30s.
What was printed in the late 1920s and early 1930s went through a period of development when John Gamble took over as founding and the concept of the hard science fiction story.
And also something else, the idea story, which is essentially a thematic science fiction story, began with John in the 30s.
And that's clearly developed and gone on. They were recently hardware stories. Originally science fiction.
It's gone from hard science to essentially soft science. In other words, the subject, the scientific element, has gone from physics and chemistry to rather Winston physics and chemistry into psychology and sociology.
And with the emergence in the 60s of the excellent crop of women writers who have almost dominated the field since then, we've had the introduction of caricatural histories.
They have become much more stories of human interest.
As has been pointed out, we've been exploring the inner universe as much as we've been exploring the outer universe, perhaps more.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
And as always, thanks for watching.